MongoDB/README.MD, before:

# MongoDB

![](../images/mongodb-image.png)

## Table of Contents

- [Introduction to MongoDB]()
- [MongoDB with Python]()
- [MongoDB with Node.js]()
- [Further Reading]()
  1. [MongoDB Documentation](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/)
  2. [mongodb.com/basics - Explaining BSON with Examples](https://www.mongodb.com/basics/bson#:~:text=BSON%20Document%20Example-,What%20is%20BSON%3F,data%20across%20web%20based%20applications.)
  3. [https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/introduction/#introduction-to-mongodb](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/introduction/)
  4. [MongoDB for VS Code](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/mongodb-vscode/)
  5. [Dev Community - Basics of MongoDB](https://dev.to/moreno8423/basics-of-mongodb-2lme)
  6. [Dev Community - Getting started with MongoDB](https://dev.to/iamadhee/getting-started-with-mongodb-52pm)

# Introduction to MongoDB

- **MongoDB** is a `NoSQL` document-based database written in `C++`.

- **MongoDB** vs **RDBMS** Concepts

| RDBMS Concept | MongoDB Concept |
| ------------- | --------------- |
| Database      | Database        |
| Tables        | Collections     |
| Rows          | Documents       |
| Columns       | Fields          |
| Index         | Index           |

## Binary JavaScript Object Notation (BSON)

- **BSON** is a textual object notation widely used to transmit and store data across web based applications.
- **JSON** is easier to understand as it is human-readable, but compared to BSON, it supports fewer data types. **BSON** encodes type and length information, too, making it easier for machines to parse.
- `BSON` can be compared to other binary formats, like [Protocol Buffers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Protocol_Buffers). The greater difference is that `BSON` is more "Schema-less" than **Protocol Buffers**, providing the advantage of flexibility and the slight disadvantage of space efficiency.
- Advantages of `BSON` include:
  1. Compact
  2. Traversable
  3. Handles additional data types like `Integer`, `Float`, `Decimal128`, `Date`, `Binary`, `GeoJSON` e.t.c.

## When should I use MongoDB instead of MySQL?

- _MySQL_ and _MongoDB_ are two rather specific types of databases. Generally you first pick the _storage method_ you want.

  - The storage methods divide themselves into two groups: _relational_ and _NoSQL_.
  - And the _NoSQL storage_ methods can be divided in about four groups (there’s a lot of division methods):
    - column store,
    - key-value store,
    - graph store,
    - document store.
  - _MongoDB_ is a _document store database system_.

- But just to compare the two: a _relational database_ is excellent for storing facts that all have intrinsic connections between them, that are the same every time.
  - Let’s say you have a school, and there’s classes that have students, and students attend courses, and courses have teachers, who teach students, give out grades, e.t.c.,. Every noun in that sentence could be made into a table, with fixed, intrinsic relations with the other tables. A student never teaches classes, a teacher never receives grades, and so on. You could still make a relational database that allows students to teach classes, using association tables, but if that keeps happening you’ll probably want to have a different kind of database altogether.
- _NoSQL databases_ in general are for when the data you are storing does not have (that many) fixed and intrinsic inner relations. Say, you want to store your error logs. A log has a code, a message, a level, and so on. But those are all attributes of your log, not separate entities with many-to-many relations with other entities.
- Now, one of the other store methods I mentioned is _key-value store_. That means getting rid of all connections between data. You’ve got just a single row with a key and your value(s) (using JSON you can store as many values in a single field as you want). Document store can be called a variant of that, except it accommodates more complex values more easily.

## How to run MongoDB

- Two common ways to run **MongoDB** include:

  1. "MongoDB Atlas," and
  2. Locally Installed MongoDB.

- You can download a free **MongoDB database** at https://www.mongodb.com Or get started right away with a **MongoDB cloud service** at https://www.mongodb.com/cloud/atlas.

# Installing MongoDB on Windows

- Download the **MongoDB installer** from the [MongoDB Download Center](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/tutorial/install-mongodb-on-windows/)
- After you download the installer, you install MongoDB following the instructions of the installer.
- For Most operating systems we use **MongoDB Community Edition**. It's free, and by now it's also all you need.

# MongoDB Atlas

- **MongoDB Atlas** is a fully-managed cloud database that handles all the complexity of _deploying_, _managing_, and healing your deployments on the cloud service provider of your choice (AWS , Azure, and GCP)

## MongoDB Atlas Free Cluster

- Atlas free clusters provide a small-scale development environment to host your data.
- Free clusters never expire, and provide access to a subset of Atlas features and functionality.
- Under the free tier you’ll have access to a subset of Atlas features, like
  - Charts and
  - Realm
- Paid clusters provide full access to Atlas features, configuration options, and operational capabilities.
- You can create and [Deploy a Free Cluster](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/atlas/tutorial/deploy-free-tier-cluster/) by first going to [MongoDB Atlas registration page](https://account.mongodb.com/account/register?tck=docs_atlas&_ga=2.33670369.1905865679.1639760133-686843528.1638558648)
- Follow the below steps to create a free cluster:

  1. Click on Build a Cluster
  2. Click on Create a Cluster

- Next Step is to create a user to access the cluster , this is different from the user you created at the beginning, this new user is for database access, the previous one was for MongoDB Atlas platform administration.

## Access MongoDB shell

- MongoDB shell is a CLI used to access **database**, **collections** and **documents**.
- to access **MongoDB** shell:
  - Step 1:
    - open terminal and type
      ```sh
        #
        sudo systemctl start mongod
      ```
    - once starting Mongod Process, we are good to open the mongo shell.
    - To open mongo shell we have to open terminal and type
      ```sh
        #
        mongo
      ```
- Mongo Shell Commands include:

  - Command 1:
    - see all the databases
      ```sh
        show dbs
      ```
  - Command 2:

    - create a new database/switch to an exising database `users`
      ```sh
        #
        use users
      ```

  - Command 3:
    - see all **collections** of a **database**
      ```sh
        #
        show collections
      ```
  - Command 4: `createCollection()`
    - create a new, `countries` collection in a database
      ```sh
        #
        db.createCollection(countries)
      ```
  - Command 5: `find()`
    - see all the documents in a, `users`, collection
      ```sh
        #
        db.users.find()
      ```
  - Command 6: `find()`
    - find a document matching a query
      ```sh
        #
        db.users.find({first_name:"Rodgers"})
      ```
  - Command 7: `findOne()`
    - find the first occurrance of the document
      ```sh
        #
        db.users.findOne({age: 25})
      ```
  - Command 8: `insert()`
    - insert a document in a `users` collection
      ```sh
        # insert a document in
        db.users.insert({first_name: "Harvey"})
      ```
  - Command 9:
    - insert multiple documents in a `users` collection
      ```sh
        # insert a document in
        db.users.insert({first_name: "Harvey"}, {first_name: "Liam"})
      ```
  - Command 10: `update()`
    - update a document in a `users` collection
    - here, the first pair is used to find the document, the second is used to update the document
      ```sh
        # insert a document in
        db.users.update({first_name: "Harvey"},{first_name: "Nyangweso"})
      ```
    - note: using the above line of code removes all the data of that particular document and write whatever we passed as key value.
    - to fix this problem, we can use `$set{}`which will only update the matching key value pair.
      ```sh
        #
        db.users.update({first_name: "Harvey"}, { $set : {first_name: "Nyangweso"} })
      ```
  - Command 11: `remove()`
    - remove all the documents from a collection
      ```sh
        #
        db.users.remove({})
      ```
    - remove a specific document from a collection
      ```sh
        #
        db.users.remove({ first_name: "Nyangweso"})
      ```
  - Command 12: `drop()`
    - drop the whole collection from a database
      ```sh
        #
        db.users.drop()
      ```
  - Command 13: `dropDatabase()`
    - delete the entire database
      ```sh
        #
        db.dropDatabase();
      ```

# MongoDB Concepts

1. **MongoDB Server**:
   - this is a server-side component which can host multiple databases.
2. A **MongoDB database**:
   - this is a physical container of collections.
3. A **Collection**:
   - in **MongoDB** is equivalent to a relational database table and it exists within a single database.
   - It includes a group of **MongoDB** documents.
4. **Document**:
   - includes a set of `key` `value` pairs.
   - All documents include a dynamic schema which means documents which comprise of same collection do not need to have same set of fields and structure.
5. **Replica Sets**: are a set of a few connected mongodb instances that store the same data.

## MongoDB Concept 1: Cluster

- a **cluster** refers to a group of servers that work together to store and manage data.
- The primary purpose of a **cluster** is to distribute data across multiple nodes to ensure high availability, fault tolerance, and scalability.
- MongoDB clusters provide several key features:
  1. Replication
  2. Sharding
  3. Load Balancing
  4. High availability

## Create a Database

- use the `use` command to create a database
  ```sh
    # create a user database
    use users
  ```

## Create a collection

- in MongoDB, data is stored in `collections` which can be created using the `db.createCollection()` command:
  ```sh
    # create a collection
    db.createCollection("users")
  ```

## Insert Data

- use `insertOne()` or `insertMany()` method
- output:
  ```json
    _id: ObjectId,
    first_name: String,
    last_name: String,
    age: Integer,
    location: {
      country: String,
      city
    }
  ```

## Query Data

## Query Data: `db.collection.find()`

- retrieve data using the `find()` method
  ```sh
    # retrieve data
    db.collection.find()
  ```
- Task 1:
  - query documents with a value greater than 1
    ```sh
      db.collection.find( { age: {  $gt: 1 }} )
    ```
- Task 2:
  - query documents with `age` between 1 and 10
    ```sh
      # query documents with
      db.collection.find({
          age: { $gt:1, $lt:10},
          active: true
        }).sort({age:-1})
    ```

## Update Data

- use the `updateOne()` or `updateMany()` method

## Delete Data

- remove data using the `deleteOne()` or `deleteMany()` method

# Indexing in MongoDB

- Database Indexing support the efficient execution of queries.
- Note:
  - **MongoDB** by default indexes the automatically generated field `_id` of documents.
  - **MongoDB** indexes can be created and dropped on-demand to accommodate any application requirement.
- MongoDB offers the following types of indexing:

  1. Single index
  2. Compund index

- To drop an index, use the below syntax:
  ```sh
    #
    db.users.dropIndex("age")
  ```

## Indexing in MongoDB: Single Field Index

- Single Field Index is an index assigned to one specific field of the document.
- create a Single Field Index using the following syntax:

  ```sh
      # create a single field index
      db.<collection>.createIndex({<field>: <type>})
  ```

- The type of the index (`1` or `-1`) describes the order of the items in our index, where `1` means **ascending** order and `-1` means **descending** order

- Task 1:
  - create a single field index:
    ```sh
      # create a single field index
      db.users.createIndex({ age: 1 })
    ```
  - this creates an ascending index on age in the `users` collection.
- Task 2:
  - create a single field index on an embedded field (field inside another field)
    ```sh
      # create a single field index
      db.users.createIndex({ loaction.country : -1 })
    ```
  - this creates a descending index on a country field inside the sub-document, `location`, in the `users` collection
- Task 3:
  -create a single field index on an entire embedded document
  ```sh
    # create a single field index
    db.users.createIndex({ loaction: -1 })
  ```

## Indexing in MongoDB: Compound Index

- **Compound Index** is an index that can hold multiple fields of the document at once (upto 32 fields)
- Compound index can still be used to filter queries that specify the last name only.
- **use case**:
  - instead of having one index on `first_name` and another on `last_name`, it would be more efficient to create an index to include both `first_name` and `last_name` if querying against the two names
- create a **Compound Index**
  ```sh
    # create a compound index
    db.users.createIndex({'first_name':1, 'last_name':1});
  ```

# MongoDB for VS Code

- **MongoDB** provides an extension for [VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/) which lets you work with **MongoDB** and your data directly within your coding environment.
- **Features** include:
  - Connect to a **MongoDB** or **Atlas cluster** to:
    - navigate through your databases and collections,
    - Explore your MongoDB Data.
    - get a quick overview of your schema and indexes, and see the documents in your collections.
    - Prototype queries and run MongoDB commands.
- To get started:
  - Install [MongoDB for VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/azure/mongodb) from the VS Code Marketplace.
  - Connect to your deployment using MongoDB for VS Code.
  - Explore your databases, collections, and documents.
  - Use JavaScript environments to interact your data. Prototype queries, run aggregations, and more.

## Using Playgrounds

- One of the most powerful features of the VS Code **MongoDB** integration is **Mongo Playgrounds**.
- Playgrounds let you _create_, _run_, and _save_ **MongoDB** commands from a VS Code editor.
- Create a new playground with the **MongoDB**: **Create MongoDB Playground** command.
- In a playground, you can reference **MongoDB** entities and commands and you get rich IntelliSense as you type. Playgrounds are useful for prototyping database operations and queries. Execute selected lines in the playground queries with the **MongoDB**: Run Selected Lines From Playground command.

```js
/* global use, db */
// MongoDB Playground
// To disable this template go to Settings | MongoDB | Use Default Template For Playground.
// Make sure you are connected to enable completions and to be able to run a playground.
// Use Ctrl+Space inside a snippet or a string literal to trigger completions.
// The result of the last command run in a playground is shown on the results panel.
// By default the first 20 documents will be returned with a cursor.
// Use 'console.log()' to print to the debug output.
// For more documentation on playgrounds please refer to
// https://www.mongodb.com/docs/mongodb-vscode/playgrounds/

// Select the database to use.
use("mongodbVSCodePlaygroundDB");

// Insert a few documents into the sales collection.
db.getCollection("sales").insertMany([
  {
    item: "abc",
    price: 10,
    quantity: 2,
    date: new Date("2014-03-01T08:00:00Z"),
  },
  {
    item: "jkl",
    price: 20,
    quantity: 1,
    date: new Date("2014-03-01T09:00:00Z"),
  },
  {
    item: "xyz",
    price: 5,
    quantity: 10,
    date: new Date("2014-03-15T09:00:00Z"),
  },
  {
    item: "xyz",
    price: 5,
    quantity: 20,
    date: new Date("2014-04-04T11:21:39.736Z"),
  },
  {
    item: "abc",
    price: 10,
    quantity: 10,
    date: new Date("2014-04-04T21:23:13.331Z"),
  },
  {
    item: "def",
    price: 7.5,
    quantity: 5,
    date: new Date("2015-06-04T05:08:13Z"),
  },
  {
    item: "def",
    price: 7.5,
    quantity: 10,
    date: new Date("2015-09-10T08:43:00Z"),
  },
  {
    item: "abc",
    price: 10,
    quantity: 5,
    date: new Date("2016-02-06T20:20:13Z"),
  },
]);

// Run a find command to view items sold on April 4th, 2014.
const salesOnApril4th = db
  .getCollection("sales")
  .find({
    date: { $gte: new Date("2014-04-04"), $lt: new Date("2014-04-05") },
  })
  .count();

// Print a message to the output window.
console.log(`${salesOnApril4th} sales occurred in 2014.`);

// Here we run an aggregation and open a cursor to the results.
// Use '.toArray()' to exhaust the cursor to return the whole result set.
// You can use '.hasNext()/.next()' to iterate through the cursor page by page.
db.getCollection("sales").aggregate([
  // Find all of the sales that occurred in 2014.
  {
    $match: {
      date: { $gte: new Date("2014-01-01"), $lt: new Date("2015-01-01") },
    },
  },
  // Group the total sales for each product.
  {
    $group: {
      _id: "$item",
      totalSaleAmount: { $sum: { $multiply: ["$price", "$quantity"] } },
    },
  },
]);
```

Commit message:

describing the _id field in mongodb

MongoDB/README.MD, after:

# MongoDB

![](../images/mongodb-image.png)

## Table of Contents

- [Introduction to MongoDB]()
- [MongoDB with Python]()
- [MongoDB with Node.js]()
- [Further Reading]()
  1. [MongoDB Documentation](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/)
  2. [mongodb.com/basics - Explaining BSON with Examples](https://www.mongodb.com/basics/bson#:~:text=BSON%20Document%20Example-,What%20is%20BSON%3F,data%20across%20web%20based%20applications.)
  3. [https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/introduction/#introduction-to-mongodb](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/introduction/)
  4. [MongoDB for VS Code](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/mongodb-vscode/)
  5. [Dev Community - Basics of MongoDB](https://dev.to/moreno8423/basics-of-mongodb-2lme)
  6. [Dev Community - Getting started with MongoDB](https://dev.to/iamadhee/getting-started-with-mongodb-52pm)

# Introduction to MongoDB

- **MongoDB** is a `NoSQL` document-based database written in `C++`.

- **MongoDB** vs **RDBMS** Concepts

| RDBMS Concept | MongoDB Concept |
| ------------- | --------------- |
| Database      | Database        |
| Tables        | Collections     |
| Rows          | Documents       |
| Columns       | Fields          |
| Index         | Index           |

## Binary JavaScript Object Notation (BSON)

- **BSON** is a textual object notation widely used to transmit and store data across web based applications.
- **JSON** is easier to understand as it is human-readable, but compared to BSON, it supports fewer data types. **BSON** encodes type and length information, too, making it easier for machines to parse.
- `BSON` can be compared to other binary formats, like [Protocol Buffers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Protocol_Buffers). The greater difference is that `BSON` is more "Schema-less" than **Protocol Buffers**, providing the advantage of flexibility and the slight disadvantage of space efficiency.
- Advantages of `BSON` include:
  1. Compact
  2. Traversable
  3. Handles additional data types like `Integer`, `Float`, `Decimal128`, `Date`, `Binary`, `GeoJSON` e.t.c.

## When should I use MongoDB instead of MySQL?

- _MySQL_ and _MongoDB_ are two rather specific types of databases. Generally you first pick the _storage method_ you want.

  - The storage methods divide themselves into two groups: _relational_ and _NoSQL_.
  - And the _NoSQL storage_ methods can be divided in about four groups (there’s a lot of division methods):
    - column store,
    - key-value store,
    - graph store,
    - document store.
  - _MongoDB_ is a _document store database system_.

- But just to compare the two: a _relational database_ is excellent for storing facts that all have intrinsic connections between them, that are the same every time.
  - Let’s say you have a school, and there’s classes that have students, and students attend courses, and courses have teachers, who teach students, give out grades, e.t.c.,. Every noun in that sentence could be made into a table, with fixed, intrinsic relations with the other tables. A student never teaches classes, a teacher never receives grades, and so on. You could still make a relational database that allows students to teach classes, using association tables, but if that keeps happening you’ll probably want to have a different kind of database altogether.
- _NoSQL databases_ in general are for when the data you are storing does not have (that many) fixed and intrinsic inner relations. Say, you want to store your error logs. A log has a code, a message, a level, and so on. But those are all attributes of your log, not separate entities with many-to-many relations with other entities.
- Now, one of the other store methods I mentioned is _key-value store_. That means getting rid of all connections between data. You’ve got just a single row with a key and your value(s) (using JSON you can store as many values in a single field as you want). Document store can be called a variant of that, except it accommodates more complex values more easily.

## How to run MongoDB

- Two common ways to run **MongoDB** include:

  1. "MongoDB Atlas," and
  2. Locally Installed MongoDB.

- You can download a free **MongoDB database** at https://www.mongodb.com Or get started right away with a **MongoDB cloud service** at https://www.mongodb.com/cloud/atlas.

# Installing MongoDB on Windows

- Download the **MongoDB installer** from the [MongoDB Download Center](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/tutorial/install-mongodb-on-windows/)
- After you download the installer, you install MongoDB following the instructions of the installer.
- For Most operating systems we use **MongoDB Community Edition**. It's free, and by now it's also all you need.

# MongoDB Atlas

- **MongoDB Atlas** is a fully-managed cloud database that handles all the complexity of _deploying_, _managing_, and healing your deployments on the cloud service provider of your choice (AWS , Azure, and GCP)

## MongoDB Atlas Free Cluster

- Atlas free clusters provide a small-scale development environment to host your data.
- Free clusters never expire, and provide access to a subset of Atlas features and functionality.
- Under the free tier you’ll have access to a subset of Atlas features, like
  - Charts and
  - Realm
- Paid clusters provide full access to Atlas features, configuration options, and operational capabilities.
- You can create and [Deploy a Free Cluster](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/atlas/tutorial/deploy-free-tier-cluster/) by first going to [MongoDB Atlas registration page](https://account.mongodb.com/account/register?tck=docs_atlas&_ga=2.33670369.1905865679.1639760133-686843528.1638558648)
- Follow the below steps to create a free cluster:

  1. Click on Build a Cluster
  2. Click on Create a Cluster

- Next Step is to create a user to access the cluster , this is different from the user you created at the beginning, this new user is for database access, the previous one was for MongoDB Atlas platform administration.

## Access MongoDB shell

- MongoDB shell is a CLI used to access **database**, **collections** and **documents**.
- to access **MongoDB** shell:
  - Step 1:
    - open terminal and type
      ```sh
        #
        sudo systemctl start mongod
      ```
    - once starting Mongod Process, we are good to open the mongo shell.
    - To open mongo shell we have to open terminal and type
      ```sh
        #
        mongo
      ```
- Mongo Shell Commands include:

  - Command 1:
    - see all the databases
      ```sh
        show dbs
      ```
  - Command 2:

    - create a new database/switch to an exising database `users`
      ```sh
        #
        use users
      ```

  - Command 3:
    - see all **collections** of a **database**
      ```sh
        #
        show collections
      ```
  - Command 4: `createCollection()`
    - create a new, `countries` collection in a database
      ```sh
        #
        db.createCollection(countries)
      ```
  - Command 5: `find()`
    - see all the documents in a, `users`, collection
      ```sh
        #
        db.users.find()
      ```
  - Command 6: `find()`
    - find a document matching a query
      ```sh
        #
        db.users.find({first_name:"Rodgers"})
      ```
  - Command 7: `findOne()`
    - find the first occurrance of the document
      ```sh
        #
        db.users.findOne({age: 25})
      ```
  - Command 8: `insert()`
    - insert a document in a `users` collection
      ```sh
        # insert a document in
        db.users.insert({first_name: "Harvey"})
      ```
  - Command 9:
    - insert multiple documents in a `users` collection
      ```sh
        # insert a document in
        db.users.insert({first_name: "Harvey"}, {first_name: "Liam"})
      ```
  - Command 10: `update()`
    - update a document in a `users` collection
    - here, the first pair is used to find the document, the second is used to update the document
      ```sh
        # insert a document in
        db.users.update({first_name: "Harvey"},{first_name: "Nyangweso"})
      ```
    - note: using the above line of code removes all the data of that particular document and write whatever we passed as key value.
    - to fix this problem, we can use `$set{}`which will only update the matching key value pair.
      ```sh
        #
        db.users.update({first_name: "Harvey"}, { $set : {first_name: "Nyangweso"} })
      ```
  - Command 11: `remove()`
    - remove all the documents from a collection
      ```sh
        #
        db.users.remove({})
      ```
    - remove a specific document from a collection
      ```sh
        #
        db.users.remove({ first_name: "Nyangweso"})
      ```
  - Command 12: `drop()`
    - drop the whole collection from a database
      ```sh
        #
        db.users.drop()
      ```
  - Command 13: `dropDatabase()`
    - delete the entire database
      ```sh
        #
        db.dropDatabase();
      ```

# MongoDB Concepts

1. **MongoDB Server**:
   - this is a server-side component which can host multiple databases.
2. A **MongoDB database**:
   - this is a physical container of collections.
3. A **Collection**:
   - in **MongoDB** is equivalent to a relational database table and it exists within a single database.
   - It includes a group of **MongoDB** documents.
4. **Document**:
   - includes a set of `key` `value` pairs.
   - All documents include a dynamic schema which means documents which comprise of same collection do not need to have same set of fields and structure.
5. **Replica Sets**: are a set of a few connected mongodb instances that store the same data.

## MongoDB Concept 1: Cluster

- a **cluster** refers to a group of servers that work together to store and manage data.
- The primary purpose of a **cluster** is to distribute data across multiple nodes to ensure high availability, fault tolerance, and scalability.
- MongoDB clusters provide several key features:
  1. Replication
  2. Sharding
  3. Load Balancing
  4. High availability

## MongoDB Concept 2: `_id`

- the `_id` field is a unique identifier, automatically generated by MongoDB for each document in a **collection**.
- It is used to uniquely identify documents within a collection, and it is indexed by default to ensure fast queries and efficient performance.
- Even though the `_id` field can have different data types in **MongoDB**, including `strings`, `integers`, and `objects`. However, it's generally recommended to use the default `ObjectId` data type, which is a `12-byte` value that consists of a `timestamp`, **machine identifier**, **process identifier**, and a **random value**.
- `ObjectId` value consists of a 12-byte value made up of the following components:

  - A `4-byte` timestamp, representing the ObjectID's creation, measured in seconds since the Unix epoch.
  - A `5-byte` random value generated once per process. This random value is unique to the machine and process.
  - A `3-byte` incrementing counter, initialized to a random value.

- **Methods** related to `ObjectID` include:
  - `ObjectId.getTimestamp()` - Returns the timestamp portion of the object as a Date.
  - `ObjectId.toString()` - Returns the JavaScript representation in the form of a string literal "`ObjectId(...)`".
  - `ObjectId.valueOf()` - Returns the representation of the object as a hexadecimal string. The returned string is the `str` attribute.

## Create a Database

- use the `use` command to create a database
  ```sh
    # create a user database
    use users
  ```

## Create a collection

- in MongoDB, data is stored in `collections` which can be created using the `db.createCollection()` command:
  ```sh
    # create a collection
    db.createCollection("users")
  ```

## Insert Data

- use `insertOne()` or `insertMany()` method
- output:
  ```json
    _id: ObjectId,
    first_name: String,
    last_name: String,
    age: Integer,
    location: {
      country: String,
      city
    }
  ```

## Query Data

## Query Data: `db.collection.find()`

- retrieve data using the `find()` method
  ```sh
    # retrieve data
    db.collection.find()
  ```
- Task 1:
  - query documents with a value greater than 1
    ```sh
      db.collection.find( { age: {  $gt: 1 }} )
    ```
- Task 2:
  - query documents with `age` between 1 and 10
    ```sh
      # query documents with
      db.collection.find({
          age: { $gt:1, $lt:10},
          active: true
        }).sort({age:-1})
    ```

## Update Data

- use the `updateOne()` or `updateMany()` method

## Delete Data

- remove data using the `deleteOne()` or `deleteMany()` method

# Indexing in MongoDB

- Database Indexing support the efficient execution of queries.
- Note:
  - **MongoDB** by default indexes the automatically generated field `_id` of documents.
  - **MongoDB** indexes can be created and dropped on-demand to accommodate any application requirement.
- MongoDB offers the following types of indexing:

  1. Single index
  2. Compund index

- To drop an index, use the below syntax:
  ```sh
    #
    db.users.dropIndex("age")
  ```

## Indexing in MongoDB: Single Field Index

- Single Field Index is an index assigned to one specific field of the document.
- create a Single Field Index using the following syntax:

  ```sh
      # create a single field index
      db.<collection>.createIndex({<field>: <type>})
  ```

- The type of the index (`1` or `-1`) describes the order of the items in our index, where `1` means **ascending** order and `-1` means **descending** order

- Task 1:
  - create a single field index:
    ```sh
      # create a single field index
      db.users.createIndex({ age: 1 })
    ```
  - this creates an ascending index on age in the `users` collection.
- Task 2:
  - create a single field index on an embedded field (field inside another field)
    ```sh
      # create a single field index
      db.users.createIndex({ loaction.country : -1 })
    ```
  - this creates a descending index on a country field inside the sub-document, `location`, in the `users` collection
- Task 3:
  -create a single field index on an entire embedded document
  ```sh
    # create a single field index
    db.users.createIndex({ loaction: -1 })
  ```

## Indexing in MongoDB: Compound Index

- **Compound Index** is an index that can hold multiple fields of the document at once (upto 32 fields)
- Compound index can still be used to filter queries that specify the last name only.
- **use case**:
  - instead of having one index on `first_name` and another on `last_name`, it would be more efficient to create an index to include both `first_name` and `last_name` if querying against the two names
- create a **Compound Index**
  ```sh
    # create a compound index
    db.users.createIndex({'first_name':1, 'last_name':1});
  ```

# MongoDB for VS Code

- **MongoDB** provides an extension for [VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/) which lets you work with **MongoDB** and your data directly within your coding environment.
- **Features** include:
  - Connect to a **MongoDB** or **Atlas cluster** to:
    - navigate through your databases and collections,
    - Explore your MongoDB Data.
    - get a quick overview of your schema and indexes, and see the documents in your collections.
    - Prototype queries and run MongoDB commands.
- To get started:
  - Install [MongoDB for VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/azure/mongodb) from the VS Code Marketplace.
  - Connect to your deployment using MongoDB for VS Code.
  - Explore your databases, collections, and documents.
  - Use JavaScript environments to interact your data. Prototype queries, run aggregations, and more.

## Using Playgrounds

- One of the most powerful features of the VS Code **MongoDB** integration is **Mongo Playgrounds**.
- Playgrounds let you _create_, _run_, and _save_ **MongoDB** commands from a VS Code editor.
- Create a new playground with the **MongoDB**: **Create MongoDB Playground** command.
- In a playground, you can reference **MongoDB** entities and commands and you get rich IntelliSense as you type. Playgrounds are useful for prototyping database operations and queries. Execute selected lines in the playground queries with the **MongoDB**: Run Selected Lines From Playground command.

```js
/* global use, db */
// MongoDB Playground
// To disable this template go to Settings | MongoDB | Use Default Template For Playground.
// Make sure you are connected to enable completions and to be able to run a playground.
// Use Ctrl+Space inside a snippet or a string literal to trigger completions.
// The result of the last command run in a playground is shown on the results panel.
// By default the first 20 documents will be returned with a cursor.
// Use 'console.log()' to print to the debug output.
// For more documentation on playgrounds please refer to
// https://www.mongodb.com/docs/mongodb-vscode/playgrounds/

// Select the database to use.
use("mongodbVSCodePlaygroundDB");

// Insert a few documents into the sales collection.
db.getCollection("sales").insertMany([
  {
    item: "abc",
    price: 10,
    quantity: 2,
    date: new Date("2014-03-01T08:00:00Z"),
  },
  {
    item: "jkl",
    price: 20,
    quantity: 1,
    date: new Date("2014-03-01T09:00:00Z"),
  },
  {
    item: "xyz",
    price: 5,
    quantity: 10,
    date: new Date("2014-03-15T09:00:00Z"),
  },
  {
    item: "xyz",
    price: 5,
    quantity: 20,
    date: new Date("2014-04-04T11:21:39.736Z"),
  },
  {
    item: "abc",
    price: 10,
    quantity: 10,
    date: new Date("2014-04-04T21:23:13.331Z"),
  },
  {
    item: "def",
    price: 7.5,
    quantity: 5,
    date: new Date("2015-06-04T05:08:13Z"),
  },
  {
    item: "def",
    price: 7.5,
    quantity: 10,
    date: new Date("2015-09-10T08:43:00Z"),
  },
  {
    item: "abc",
    price: 10,
    quantity: 5,
    date: new Date("2016-02-06T20:20:13Z"),
  },
]);

// Run a find command to view items sold on April 4th, 2014.
const salesOnApril4th = db
  .getCollection("sales")
  .find({
    date: { $gte: new Date("2014-04-04"), $lt: new Date("2014-04-05") },
  })
  .count();

// Print a message to the output window.
console.log(`${salesOnApril4th} sales occurred in 2014.`);

// Here we run an aggregation and open a cursor to the results.
// Use '.toArray()' to exhaust the cursor to return the whole result set.
// You can use '.hasNext()/.next()' to iterate through the cursor page by page.
db.getCollection("sales").aggregate([
  // Find all of the sales that occurred in 2014.
  {
    $match: {
      date: { $gte: new Date("2014-01-01"), $lt: new Date("2015-01-01") },
    },
  },
  // Group the total sales for each product.
  {
    $group: {
      _id: "$item",
      totalSaleAmount: { $sum: { $multiply: ["$price", "$quantity"] } },
    },
  },
]);
```
