04-Working-with-Apache-Kafka/Readme.md, before:

# Apache Kafka

## Table Of Contents

# What is Apache Kafka?

- Apache Kafka is an open-source distributed event streaming platform. i.e., it’s a platform widely used to work with real-time streaming data pipelines and to integrate applications to work with such streams. It’s mainly responsible for:
  - publishing/subscribing to the stream of records,
  - their real-time processing,
  - and their ordered storage

# Use Cases of Kafka

1. Real-time data processing and analytics
2. Log and event data aggregation
3. **Stream Processing in big data pipelines**:
   - Instead of piping Data to a certain storage downstream we mount a Stream Processing Framework on top of Kafka Topics.
   - The Data is filtered, enriched and then piped to the downstream systems to be further used according to the use case.
4. **Database Replication**:
   - Database Commit log is piped to a Kafka topic.

# Kafka Concepts

## Kafka Concept #!: Broker

- A single **Kafka Cluster** is made of **Brokers**. They handle **producers** and **consumers** and keeps data replicated in the cluster.

## Kafka Concept #2: Topics

- **Kafka** categorizes data into **topics**. A **topic** is a category or feed name to which records are published.
- **Producers** publish messages to a specific topic. The messages can be in any format, with `JSON` and `Avro` being popular options. **Consumers** subscribe to a topic to consume the records published by producers.

- **Features of Kafka Topics**
  - Different **topics** are identified by their names and will store different kinds of events. For example a social media application might have `posts`, `likes`, and `comments` **topics** to record every time a user creates a post, likes a post, or leaves a comment.
  - Multiple applications can write to and read from the same topic. An application might also read messages from one topic, filter or transform the data, and then write the result to another topic.
  - **topics** are append-only. When you write a message to a topic, it's added to the end of the log. Events in a topic are immutable. Once they're written to a topic, you can't change them.
  - **Topics** are durable, holding onto messages for a specific period (by default 7 days) by saving them to physical storage on disk.
  - You can configure topics so that messages expire after a certain amount of time, or when a certain amount of storage is exceeded. You can even store messages indefinitely as long as you can pay for the storage costs.

## Kafka Concept #3: Partitions

- In order to help Kafka to scale, **topics** can be divided into **partitions**. This breaks up the event log into multiple logs, each of which lives on a separate node in the Kafka cluster. This means that the work of writing and storing messages can be spread across multiple machines.
- When you create a **topic**, you specify the amount of **partitions** it has. The **partitions** are themselves numbered, starting at `0`. When a new event is written to a topic, it's appended to one of the topic's **partitions**.
- **Messages** that have the same key will always be sent to the same **partition**, and in the same order. The key is run through a hashing function which turns it into an integer. This output is then used to select a **partition**.
- **Messages** within each partition are guaranteed to be ordered. For example, all messages with the same `customer_id` as their key will be sent to the same partition in the order in which Kafka received them.

## Kafka Concept #4: Offsets

- Each **message** in a **partition** gets an id that is an incrementing integer, called an **offset**.
- **Offsets** start at 0 and are incremented every time Kafka writes a message to a partition. This means that each message in a given partition has a unique offset.
- **Offsets** are not reused, even when older messages get deleted. They continue to increment, giving each new message in the partition a unique id.
- When data is read from a **partition**, it is read in order from the lowest existing **offset** upwards.

## Kafka Concept #5: Zookeepr

- [Zookeeper](https://zookeeper.apache.org/) a service for managing and synchronizing distributed systems. It is a service used to manage Kafka clusters.
- Kafka uses Zookeeper to manage the brokers in a cluster, and requires Zookeeper even if you're running a Kafka cluster with only one broker.

# Kafka with Schema Registry

# Resources

1. [kafka.apache.org/intro](https://kafka.apache.org/intro)
2. [zookeeper.apache.org](https://zookeeper.apache.org/)
3. [kafka.apache.org/downloads](https://kafka.apache.org/downloads)
4. [How To Set Up Apache Kafka With Docker?](https://codersee.com/how-to-set-up-apache-kafka-with-docker/)

Commit message:

added some kafka CLI commands for consumer groups

04-Working-with-Apache-Kafka/Readme.md, after:

# Apache Kafka

## Table Of Contents

# What is Apache Kafka?

- Apache Kafka is an open-source distributed event streaming platform. i.e., it’s a platform widely used to work with real-time streaming data pipelines and to integrate applications to work with such streams. It’s mainly responsible for:
  - publishing/subscribing to the stream of records,
  - their real-time processing,
  - and their ordered storage

# Use Cases of Kafka

1. Real-time data processing and analytics
2. Log and event data aggregation
3. **Stream Processing in big data pipelines**:
   - Instead of piping Data to a certain storage downstream we mount a Stream Processing Framework on top of Kafka Topics.
   - The Data is filtered, enriched and then piped to the downstream systems to be further used according to the use case.
4. **Database Replication**:
   - Database Commit log is piped to a Kafka topic.

# Kafka Concepts

## Kafka Concept #1: Broker

- A single **Kafka Cluster** is made of **Brokers**. They handle **producers** and **consumers** and keeps data replicated in the cluster.

## Kafka Concept #2: Topics

- **Kafka** categorizes data into **topics**. A **topic** is a category or feed name to which records are published.
- **Producers** publish messages to a specific topic. The messages can be in any format, with `JSON` and `Avro` being popular options. **Consumers** subscribe to a topic to consume the records published by producers.

- **Features of Kafka Topics**
  - Different **topics** are identified by their names and will store different kinds of events. For example a social media application might have `posts`, `likes`, and `comments` **topics** to record every time a user creates a post, likes a post, or leaves a comment.
  - Multiple applications can write to and read from the same topic. An application might also read messages from one topic, filter or transform the data, and then write the result to another topic.
  - **topics** are append-only. When you write a message to a topic, it's added to the end of the log. Events in a topic are immutable. Once they're written to a topic, you can't change them.
  - **Topics** are durable, holding onto messages for a specific period (by default 7 days) by saving them to physical storage on disk.
  - You can configure topics so that messages expire after a certain amount of time, or when a certain amount of storage is exceeded. You can even store messages indefinitely as long as you can pay for the storage costs.

## Kafka Concept #3: Partitions

- In order to help Kafka to scale, **topics** can be divided into **partitions**. This breaks up the event log into multiple logs, each of which lives on a separate node in the Kafka cluster. This means that the work of writing and storing messages can be spread across multiple machines.
- When you create a **topic**, you specify the amount of **partitions** it has. The **partitions** are themselves numbered, starting at `0`. When a new event is written to a topic, it's appended to one of the topic's **partitions**.
- **Messages** that have the same key will always be sent to the same **partition**, and in the same order. The key is run through a hashing function which turns it into an integer. This output is then used to select a **partition**.
- **Messages** within each partition are guaranteed to be ordered. For example, all messages with the same `customer_id` as their key will be sent to the same partition in the order in which Kafka received them.

## Kafka Concept #4: Offsets

- Each **message** in a **partition** gets an id that is an incrementing integer, called an **offset**.
- **Offsets** start at 0 and are incremented every time Kafka writes a message to a partition. This means that each message in a given partition has a unique offset.
- **Offsets** are not reused, even when older messages get deleted. They continue to increment, giving each new message in the partition a unique id.
- When data is read from a **partition**, it is read in order from the lowest existing **offset** upwards.

## Kafka Concept #5: Producers

- **Producers** are applications that publish data to **Kafka topics**. They write messages to specific topics, and these messages are then stored in the **Kafka brokers**

## Kafka Concept #6: Consumers

- **Consumers** are applications that read data from **Kafka topics**. They subscribe to one or more topics and receive messages from the partitions of those topics.

## Kafka Concept #7: Consumer Groups

- **Consumers** can be organized into **consumer groups**, where each group consists of one or more consumers. Each message in a partition is delivered to only one consumer within a group, allowing parallel processing of data.

## Kafka Concept #8: Zookeepr

- [Zookeeper](https://zookeeper.apache.org/) a service for managing and synchronizing distributed systems. It is a service used to manage Kafka clusters.
- Kafka uses Zookeeper to manage the brokers in a cluster, and requires Zookeeper even if you're running a Kafka cluster with only one broker.

# Resources

1. [kafka.apache.org/intro](https://kafka.apache.org/intro)
2. [zookeeper.apache.org](https://zookeeper.apache.org/)
3. [confluent.io - Kafka Listeners – Explained](https://www.confluent.io/blog/kafka-listeners-explained/)
4. [confluent.io - Introducing the Kafka Consumer: Getting Started with the New Apache Kafka 0.9 Consumer Client](https://www.confluent.io/blog/tutorial-getting-started-with-the-new-apache-kafka-0-9-consumer-client/)
